.TH ALABOFUR 1 "April 2026" "alabofur 0.1.0"
.SH NAME
alabofur \- simple tc-based bandwidth shaper with ufw-like UX
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B alabofur
.RI command " [options]"
.br
.B alabofur add
.I IFACE DOWNLOAD_MB UPLOAD_MB
.br
.B alabofur deny
.I IFACE
.br
.B alabofur clear
.I IFACE
.br
.B alabofur list
.RI [IFACE...]
.br
.B alabofur apply
.RI [IFACE...]
.br
.B alabofur configtest
.br
.B alabofur install-service
.RI [--force]
.br
.B alabofur start|stop|restart|status
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B alabofur
applies upload/download limits per network interface using Linux
.BR tc (8)
with the same simplicity as
.BR ufw (8) .
Configuration lives in
.IR /etc/alabofur/alabofur.conf
and optional
.IR /etc/alabofur/*.conf
files for additional interfaces.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B add IFACE DOWNLOAD_MB UPLOAD_MB
Write interface config and apply limits. Use
.B --ipv4-only
to skip IPv6 filters.
.TP
.B deny IFACE
Apply near-zero (1 Mbit) limits to effectively block traffic.
.TP
.B clear IFACE
Remove shaping rules for the interface.
.TP
.B list [IFACE...]
Show configured limits and current tc qdisc state.
.TP
.B apply [IFACE...]
Apply limits from config files (used by systemd service).
.TP
.B configtest
Validate configuration files.
.TP
.B install-service [--force]
Install systemd unit at
.IR /etc/systemd/system/alabofur.service
and enable it.
.TP
.B start|stop|restart|status
Manage the systemd service.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/alabofur/alabofur.conf
Default configuration file. Each section name is the interface name and must define
.B download_mbit
and
.B upload_mbit .
.TP
.I /etc/alabofur/*.conf
Optional per-interface configuration files.
.SH AUTHOR
Tuncay Bahadır <tuncaybahadir@protonmail.com>
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR tc (8),
.BR ip (8),
.BR systemctl (1)
